@c blurb.texi --- standard GNU Serveez description
@c
@c Copyright (C) 2011-2013 Thien-Thi Nguyen
@c Copyright (C) 2000, 2001, 2002 Stefan Jahn <stefan@lkcc.org>
@c Copyright (C) 2000, 2001, 2002 Raimund Jacob <raimi@lkcc.org>
@c Copyright (C) 1999 Martin Grabmueller <mgrabmue@cs.tu-berlin.de>
@c
@c Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
@c under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.1
@c or any later version published by the Free Software Foundation.
@c A copy of the license is included in the section entitled "GNU
@c Free Documentation License".
@c
@c -------------------------------------------------------------------
@c The following text is found in various places, not only in texinfo
@c documentation, so we keep it simple (don't include any markup).
@c
GNU Serveez is a server framework.  It provides routines and help
for implementing IP-based servers (currently TCP, UDP and ICMP).
It supports named pipes for all connection-oriented protocols.

We think it is worth the effort because many people need server
functionality within their applications.  However, many people
experience problems with select(2) or poll(2) loops, and with
non-blocking operations.

GNU Serveez demonstrates various aspects of advanced network
programming in a portable manner.  It is known to compile and
run on GNU/Linux systems, as well as on other 32-bit and 64-bit
flavours of Unix and on Microsoft Windows (9x/ME/NT/2000/XP).

You can use it for implementing your own servers or for
understanding how certain network services and operations work.

The package includes a number of servers that work already: an
HTTP server, an IRC server, a Gnutella spider and some others.
One of the highlights is that you can run all protocols on the
same port.  The application itself is single threaded but it uses
helper processes for concurrent name resolution and ident lookups.
