.ds SZ GNU Serveez
.ds Rv 0.2.2
.ds Dt 2013-12-02
.ds pr serveez-config
.ds pb \fB\*(pr\fR
.TH "\*(pr" 1 "\*(Dt" "\*(SZ \*(Rv"
.SH NAME
\*(pr \- The \*(SZ configuration script.
.SH SYNOPSIS
\*(pb \fIcommand\fR
.SH DESCRIPTION
If you plan to embed libserveez into standalone C/C++ applications,
or to call to its functions dynamically, you need to tell the
compiler and linker where to find the headers and libraries.
The \*(pb script, installed with \*(SZ
(presuming it was configured with \fB--enable-libserveez-install\fR),
provides the correct compiler and linker flags for your installation.
.SH COMMANDS
.TP
\fB\-v\fR, \fB\-\-version\fR
show installed Serveez version
.TP
\fB\-h\fR, \fB\-\-help\fR
show usage info (this message)
.TP
\fB\-l\fR, \fB\-\-ldflags\fR
print libraries to link with
.TP
\fB\-c\fR, \fB\-\-cflags\fR
print C compiler flags to compile with
.SH "REPORTING BUGS"
Please send bug reports to <bug-serveez@gnu.org>.
.SH "COPYRIGHT"
Copyright \(co 2013 Thien-Thi Nguyen
.PP
Copying and distribution of this manpage, with or without modification,
are permitted in any medium without royalty provided the copyright
notice and this notice are preserved.  This manpage is offered as-is,
without any warranty.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
The full documentation for \*(pb is maintained as a Texinfo manual.
If the
.BR info (1)
and \*(pb programs are properly installed at your site, the command
.IP
.B info serveez
.PP
should give you access to the complete manual.
Additionally, the \*(SZ homepage:
.IP
.B http://www.gnu.org/software/serveez/
.PP
has news and links to the latest release, development site, etc.
